The Joe Rogan experience. And today's podcast.
Okay. Today's podcast. So first of all, um, you can reach it now.
And I finally got a website which is Eric weinstein.org.
And, um, I told you that we have to leave this planet and that
it's hard not to laugh. Sorry. It's just hard not to laugh, but you're serious.
I'm deadly leave this planet. We have to leave this planet. Why,
why do we have to, well, because we can't all be.
As planned as the best beaches as.
This planet. It's China, Russia, Iran,
and the United States under ridiculous leadership.
There's lots of reasons why we have to leave this planet.
We're not good stewards. We're not wise enough to stay on this planet.
We're too powerful. We went through this. And by the way,
you pointed out this quote, which is, we are now God's, but for the wisdom,
and that became a meme. So that was very interesting.
Uh, I, I gave these lectures, um, I think in 2013.
Best quotes ever.
Isn't it don't know at Oxford who originated that
quote. It was me. That was you. Yeah.
When did you say it.
On your program? What day?
Which one? Do you remember? Which one? You've probably turned into a clip.
I'm trying to think about,
because it just came off my tongue and you it's one of those ones where I'll
drive down the street and it'll pop in my head. You're like the nicest person.
No, no, no. It's, it's a, it's a fantastic quote, but it's so right.
It's like every now and then someone can get the whole thing in a sentence.
We now gods, but for the wisdom.
So that's why we have to get off this planet diversify because there too many
people have God-like powers like Donald Trump commands a tremendous amount of
godlike power. Thanks to our physics community.
Well, has ratings. See how hard they are.
Just stay on focus. Sorry. Okay. Okay.
So be just too much godlike power, right?
So the best hope that I can come up and it's a slim one is is that if we could
figure out what goes beyond Einstein's theory,
the Einsteinian speed limit might be bendable or breakable because we would be
in a framework that was larger than Einstein's.
People often interpret this as what they call FTL or faster than light travel.
But that's not what I mean necessarily.
What I mean is is that the underlying source code gives us opportunities that we
don't normally have. So seven years ago, I tried to release,
I tried giving these lectures at Oxford,
which is probably the university that is spiritually closest to what I care
about because they care about geometry and physics and they interrelationship,
and they've kept the face with faith with that tradition through people like
Roger Penrose and Michael [inaudible]. And, um,
I released this theory of geometric unity, um,
or rather I released the video of the lecture that introduces this theory. So this was the first time since 19 83, 84.
Um,  that I talked in public when I started this, uh,  program, uh,
when I was 18, 19, something like that. Um,
and I just released the video today on our YouTube channel. Um.
And it's the video of you giving this discussion? Yeah, so it's.
Introduced by professor Marcus DeSoto who has, uh, Richard Dawkins,
old job as the somone professor for the public understanding of science.
And he just, he met me in a bar and he got me a little drunk and he said, okay,
what are you really working on? And I told him, and at first it sounded crazy.
And then he started thinking about it and he asked me more questions.
And he brought me over to Oxford. He got me an appointment,
had me talk to their experts.
And then he decided that he wanted me to give these what he called special
somone lectures.
And they are an attempt to go beyond Einstein,
to look for a unified theory of physics between the two major
branches that have resisted unification. Now that's usually in the modern era,
confused with the idea of quantizing gravity, but the quantum,
the quantum gravity imperative is a, um,
it's a political program that comes out of what would have been the quantum
field theory community before it became the string theory community,
which the idea is we have to take Einstein and make him submit to the will of
bore. And I don't think it's exactly like that. They don't,
I think they got it wildly wrong and they synchronize themselves and sort of
took the field off the cliff and they weren't able to ship a product.
They couldn't deliver on any of this promise.
And so when I saw that they were about to go off a cliff, I switched fields, uh,
as an undergraduate into mathematics.
And I used mathematics as a stalking horse to study the same sort of underlying
structures, but not to get swept up in the politics of physics.
And I had this theory, uh,
which I can now talk about for the first time in like 37 years or whatever it
is.
And like today's the first day that I'm sort of free because I've kept this to
myself. So if you want it any question about geometric unity.
But why, why did you keep this to yourself? Cause I don't trust these people.
You don't trust these people in the same.
Like I know there was some people that had written some article it wasn't Sean,
correct. It doesn't matter.
If it's not them. It's a,
it's an entire system that believes in peer review at it believes in four
citations, you have to be at a university,
you have to get an endorsement to use that preprint server. Um,
it's too few resources, too many sharp elbows.
Do you think that there's, there's a logic to that method? No,
I think to preserve it from charlatans and you have to do crackpots that are,
yeah. That just want to publish stories. So this way you have to be sponsored,
it makes sense, right?
Yes. But doing whatever mistakes I'm making,
[inaudible] I'm wrong about it, but this theory that's just fine. Um,
I'll find out that I'm wrong. Give me the layman's version of the theory.
All right. First time ever. Yeah. Um,
do you know that let's start off with Asher's drawing hands.
So do you, Jamie, do you have a picture for that?
The key problem that we have in a fundamental theory that people don't think
about is not why is there something rather than nothing?
I don't think we can answer that. It's why is there so much that is,
that is rich out of almost nothing.
And so this issue shows that if you had a piece of paper,
could you will into being the hands, holding pens,
using ink to draw each other, right.
That problem is akin to the problem that we face in a fundamental theory.
If you had the canvas,
how would the canvas bring all of the richness that you see around you into
being? And what I did was I said, okay,
we have to go below Weinstein. So we have four degrees of freedom,
but they're not yet space and time it's prodo space time. But before,
and then I said, okay,
that those four degrees of freedom are like the stands in a
stadium in the stands somehow need to build the pitch.
And the pitch is a 14 dimensional space.
So if let's imagine, um, that you had,
uh, okay, we have got four objects here, right?
So the four degrees of freedom correspondent for objects,
then we need a ruler to measure how much of each of these four objects we have.
So that would be four additional variables.
And then you have angles cause length and angle is what Einstein gave us in
space time.
So the angles between any two objects are the same as the reverse of the angle.
So then you can count it up in there, six angles to be hat.
So there's four degrees of freedom,
plus four rulers plus six protractors, which is 14.
So there's a 14 dimensional auxiliary space. And in my estimation,
you and I are in some ways potentially having this conversation in a 14
dimensional world that we perceive back in the stands,
rather than on the pitch as a four dimensional conversation,
that is we're in a three-dimensional room going forward in time.
So I've called this,
the observation and the observation is two spaces rather
than Einstein's one space. Can I.
Stop you right there? Sure. Why 14 dimensions?
Because I'm saying that the fields that is the stuff
is dancing, not mostly on the four dimensions that we think we,
but it's also dancing on the rulers and the protractors. So in other words,
if I have X, Y, and Z,
I need rulers in the X direction of the Y the direction of the Z to measure
things. And I need a watch, which would be like a ruler in the time direct.
So those four rulers are in fact in play as well. And the,
the protractors because of like a space-time is four degrees of freedom plus
rulers. And protractors,
I'm saying work over the space of all rulers and all protractors as part of
where these particles and fields can dance.
So the rulers and the protractors are part of the system,
not just a choice of particular rulers and particular protractors.
So by choosing particular rulers in particular,
protractors Einstein is grabbing a tiny filament of the space of all
possible rulers. And protractors. So in, in effect,
space-time has recovered as the act of the observation contemplating itself.
That's a little bit poetic,
but I mean that the choice of a space-time metric inside of the space of all
metrics is a section of a 14 dimensional bundle over a four dimensional
space. Now that's the first sort of mind-bending weird thing is,
is that this is not happening in one place.
It's happening in two places in X and in Y the stands and the pitch
there,
things that are happening in the stands and the things that are happening in the
pitch. So, you know,
when a guy's like trying to make a free throw and everybody's waving their giant
noodles, trying to get them to miss,
there's an interaction between what's happening in the stands and what's
happening on the floor.
And the observers is the bundling of two spaces and saying, Hey,
you're confused as to what's going on here.
Some fields are happening in the stand.
Some fields are happening on the floor and there,
everything feels as if it's happening in the stands.
Cause that's where you're sitting in some weird way.
Then you've got this really crazy stuff, which I think, um,
one aspect of it is everybody in theoretical physics is looking to figure out
whether there were three or more generations that is copies of matter.
Everything in this room is generation one,
it's all made up of up corks down corks and electrons.
So that up quirks and down corks give you protons and neutrons and electrons
give you the sort of interesting personality of the various chemical elements.
They're also neutrinos, but they're streaming through us.
I'm not going to count them. And that's all generation one of matter.
So everything in that thing of that is like plastic Lego.
Then there's another Lego set made out of wood.
And then there's another Lego set made out of like led, you know,
and we don't see those other two Lego sets,
except if we're doing very energetic experiments.
So there were three copies of matter and everybody was trying to figure out
three or more. And I thought maybe it's two or fewer.
And so one of the aspects of this theory is,
is that the third generation of matter is an imposter.
It looks like this generation of matter in terms of its particle personalities,
but if you were actually to heat up the system,
it would unify with a bunch of particles nobody's ever seen before.
And so their predictions for what those new particle properties would be.
There's also a fourth pseudo generation of what would be called spin three
halves matter, which is not prohibited,
but has never been seen as a fundamental.
So it makes predictions for the particle properties of new spin,
half a new spin, three halfs particles.
It attempts to say that there are sectors of matter that I think decoupled that
the universe is not in fact left, right. Asymmetric,
which would be called [inaudible]. Um,  and if you think about, uh,
the weak force, so if you have a new neutron on a table it'll
decay, and I think something like 17 on average, half-life when it decay
. There's an asymmetry in that decay called beta decay. And that was found by a woman
up Madam
blue from Columbia and the cobalt 60 experiment. So in the fifties, this, uh,
this gal, Madam Wu, uh,  who should have
won a Nobel prize, discovered that when cobalt 60 decays through beta decay, the electrons come spin out one side and not the other meaning that the universe is like
a
Marilyn Monroe or Cindy Crawford, having a birthmark that lets you tell the left from the right. So this is like the ultimate experimental bad-ass who never got recognized
, uh,  fully.
Uh, and she did an experiment based on work of yang and Lee that for the first
time showed that the universe had a preference of one of its leftover it's
right. If you will, I don't believe that preference is fundamental.
I believe that there's an another copy of matter that,
so the analogy I give is that if you think,
if you look at your three fingers in the center of your hand,
your middle finger, which is my favorite, uh,
is obviously symmetrical about itself,
your digit ratio two and four is pretty close,
but is determined by the amount of testosterone you're exposed to in utero.
And then your thumb and your pinky are wildly off,
but you could try to make it symmetric and say, well, you know,
a pinky is like a lame thumb, which it isn't.
If you're just looking at your hand,
you're trying to figure out why is my hand asymmetrical?
But you don't realize that you've got another hand and it's thumb to thumb,
not thumb to pinkie. That is the symmetry.
So when you place your fingertips together, you see that if you didn't know,
if you were like, oh, all of her sexed out,
and you could only see part of your body, you would think about, oh,
their world is asymmetric. Well,
my belief is that in weak gravitational situations,
this other matter decouples so you only see one hand or the other. And we're,
we're all in one hand in this. Um,
so yeah, what I'm starting to do, uh, is, is that I'm terrified,
um, of talking about this stuff. I don't have the right credentials,
not a physicist. Uh, I've been out of this game for forever.
So I often say the wrong things and break rules and who knows what?
And I haven't really talked about it. This is like really a very lone S I mean,
I've been completely alone on this project all.
My life. What do you think the end result of this project potentially could be?
Cause you're saying we could get off this planet. What do you, what, like,
what are you talking about in terms of the actual implementation of this,
this theory of yours.
Amy, if you could bring up, um, my answer to the final edge question,
which is what is the last question John Brockman asked when the final year that
he conducted the annual edge question.
And that is the annual edge question is.
Ask like 200 people, many of them physicists or biologists or mathematicians,
you'd ask a question and they'd write an essay.
And then every year he'd publish it as a book. And so I did that for 10 years.
Finally, he got tired of it and he said, okay, this is my final year.
We've exhausted. This, what is the last question?
So this is the question that I asked. So.
Does something unprecedented happen when we finally
learn our own source code? No.
Nobody picked up on this, but that's what my concern is,
which is what happens when the universe finally contemplates
itself. When we are the first, like,
we're always worried about the AI becoming self-aware all a Skynet,
okay. We are the AI
and we're about to become self-aware if we can figure out what our own source
code is. So we are a Skynet. So.
You're talking about the source code of reality itself. Yep.
And that our perception,
our limited perceptions of reality are giving us a distorted view of what the
landscape actually is.
I'm trying to make sure I was somewhat holding this back because I'm afraid of
what it unlocks. And now that I know that we're willing to elect Donald Trump,
not store masks, uh, play footsie with China, uh,
be Putin's, all of this stuff, uh,
to hell with this, we're going to mismanage this planet into Armageddon.
If we don't get some grownups into the room.
And so I don't know that I'm a grownup,
but I'm willing to vie for leadership by putting something up, having it, uh,
investigated and seeing where it goes.
What is your number one fear about this, uh,
this source code being, I don't know of a better term mastered last.
Time we gained some serious insight into the way nuclei
worked, uh, that with a little bit of geometry, uh,
from Stanislaus alum and Edward teller, uh,
gave us, uh, the namesake of the bikini.
That was a terrifying moment. We changed everything changed in 19.
I think that was 54.
The namesake of the bikini bikini Atol was an island in the Pacific
where we up a hydrogen device.
Is that, that insane,
those insane images where you could see the water going a mile high into the
sky. Gorgeous. Yeah. Is that what that is? Yeah, but they did that a lot.
Well, they did it for a period of time now. And so when, to your question,
what if, what,
so it's still expensive to create fusion devices.
So we don't know of any individuals who own the ability to create fusion
devices. If you recall, at some point, um, somebody made a functioning,
uh, nuclear reactor out of discarded, uh, smoke detectors
and ran and got like 500 smoke detectors,
took out the radioactive element and created a reactor, really think so. So kid,
right? Yeah. Probably a kid who couldn't get into Harvard. Um,
so we have a situation in which we don't know when he
ordinary humans will gain limitless, destructive power, you know,
try to imagine the Columbine kids, um,
weaponizing viruses or something like that.
So one of the great dangers is that great power.
I can't tell what the power would be if the theory is correct,
it might give us the ability to escape. It might give us the escape though.
Yeah. Why.
Do we have, this is what, what I'm, I'm always so confused about like,
cause even when Elan talks about going to Mars yeah.
Like Mars sucks. Mars sucks. Can't you fix here?
Wouldn't that be the best approach? Well, you and I agree on that. Yeah.
What we don't agree on I think is,
is that I am convinced that we don't have the ability to steward this place.
Why.
Don't you think we're better at it now than we were a thousand.
Years ago? No, no, no, no.
So Gangas Kahn was doing a better job.
Gingiss Khan was doing a better job because he didn't have limitless power.
Just try to imagine it,
try to imagine a full-on nuclear interchange and then we're having this
conversation.
So you you're concerned that nuclear war
is, uh, not just possible, but inevitable.
It's certainly inevitable given a long enough time series because all these
weapons simply will become cheaper.
There's no countermeasure that we it's too easy to destroy things relative to
building. Right, right.